User Plane Gateway (UPG) based on VPP
=====================================

UPG implements a GTP-U user plane based on [3GPP TS 23.214][TS23214]
and [3GPP TS 29.244][TS29244] Release 15. It is implemented as an
out-of-tree plugin for [FD.io VPP][VPP].

The possible uses for UPG are:
* User Plane Function (UPF) in 5G networks
* Packet Data Network Gateway User plane (PGW-U)
* Traffic Detection Function User plane (TDF-U)

Current State
-------------

UPG is used in production in conjunction with [erGW][erGW] as GGSN/PGW
in multiple installation in several telecom operators (Tier 1 and
smaller).

For the list of known issues, see [KNOWN_ISSUES document](KNOWN_ISSUES.md).

Working features
----------------

* PFCP protocol
  * en/decoding of most IEs
  * heartbeat
  * node related messages
  * session related messages
* Uplink and Downlink Packet Detection Rules (PDR) and
  Forward Action Rules (FAR) -- (some parts)
* IPv4 -- inner and outer
* IPv6 -- inner and outer
* Usage Reporting Rules (URR)
* PFCP Session Reports
* Linked Usage Reports

No yet working
--------------

* Buffer Action Rules (BAR)
* QoS Enforcement Rule (QER)

Limitations
-----------

* FAR action with destination LI are not implemented
* Ethernet bearer support


Development setup
-----------------

Design rationale for the development environment is this:

* provide an easily reproducible development and build environment
  usable both on CI and locally
* provide quick commands for common tasks
* simplify bisecting against upstream VPP
* discourage downstream VPP changes, as we should make effort to
  upstream them

Relevant parts of the source tree layout:
* `hack/` contains helper scripts most of which are wrapped in `make`
  commands
* `Makefile` provides user interface for the environment
* `upf/` contains the source code of the plugin [^1]
* `upf/test/` contains the integration tests [^1]
* `vpp/` contains VPP source code and is not committed
* `vpp-patches/` contains patches to apply to the upstream VPP code
  (applied automatically via `git am`; generated by hand with `git
  format-patch`)
* `vpp.spec` contains the info on VPP repo, branch and commit to use

`upg/` is symlinked to the VPP plugins directory, one can just go
to `vpp/` directory after `make update-vpp` and follow
[upstream VPP build instructions][VPPBUILD]. But, as an alternative,
UPG does provide some build helpers of its own.

There's a simple dockerized environment wrapped in 'make'
commands. During the development cycle, VPP is cloned into `vpp/`
subdirectory from an upstream repository with some of the
[patches](vpp-patches/) applied. This is done automatically but can
also be done via `make update-vpp` which will delete all of the
changes made to `vpp/` directory. You can make temporary changes under
`vpp/` for debugging purposes.

The "build image" which is used for the devenv is tagged with a hash
of `Dockerfile.build` as well as VPP's external dependencies.

The following `make` commands are supported:

* `make image-debug` builds a debug UPG Docker image named `upg:debug`
* `make image-release` builds a release UPG Docker image named `upg:release`
* `make test-debug`, `make test-release` build VPP and run UPG
  integration tests in debug and release mode respectively. The
  compilation results are retained under `vpp/`
* `make retest-debug`, `make retest-release` run UPG integration tests
  in debug and release mode respectively without building VPP. These
  can be run under `make test-debug` / `make test-release` to re-run
  the tests quickly if there were no UPG / VPP code changes
* `make ensure-build-image` checks if the build image exists or can be
  pulled and builds it otherwise
* `make update-build-image-tag` updates the build image tag in
  `.gitlab-ci.yaml` and Dockerfiles according to the hash calculated
  from `Dockerfile.build` and VPP external dependencies
* `make install-hooks` installs git hooks in the repo which prevent
  the user from making commits that contain `ZZZZZ:` substring. This
  is handy for debug print like `clib_warning("ZZZZZ: i %d", i);`
* `make update-vpp` re-clones VPP into `vpp/` directory
* `make buildenv` runs an interactive shell inside the build
  environment with UPG and VPP sources mounted into the container
* `make e2e-debug` and `make e2e-release` build UPG in debug and
  release mode respectively and run E2E tests for it. For more information,
  see [E2E test documentation](test/e2e/README.md)

If docker is used, one should set the following environment variable
to enable wrapping the internally run commands in a docker container:

```
export UPG_BUILDENV=docker
```

It is also possible to use a k8s cluster to run the build container:
```
export UPG_BUILDENV=k8s
```
In this case, the buildenv is run as statefulset inside the cluster.
It can be removed using
```
hack/buildenv.sh clean
```

As an alternative, it’s possible to run commands such as

```console
$ make -C vpp test TEST=test_upf V=2 EXTERN_TESTS=../../upf/test
```

using VPP’s usual Makefile. [upf/](upf/) subdirectory is symlinked to
`vpp/src/plugins/upf` (note though that there's an issue with VPP's
test discovery mechanism, thus `EXTERN_TEST=...` variable is required
to run the tests).

[VPP]: https://fd.io
[erGW]: https://github.com/travelping/ergw
[TS23214]: http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/html-info/23214.htm
[TS29244]: http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/html-info/29244.htm
[VPPBUILD]: https://wiki.fd.io/view/VPP/Pulling,_Building,_Running,_Hacking_and_Pushing_VPP_Code#Building

[^1]: Historically, the project was named simply "UPF". There may be more UPF->UPG renames later
